# Thoughts and Productivity Need Time

I claim, as many others have claimed before, that focus and regular periods of [solitude](https://www.inc.com/amy-morin/5-ways-solitude-can-make-you-more-successful-backed-by-science.html) contribute significantly to a happy and fulfilled life. I would go as far as to say that boredom could be a greater factor in innovation than an engaged life. Boredom sparks ideas and lets people experience the energetic human nature of work and creation. Boredom makes us creative and inspires us. On the other side, without creation and work, life feels unfulfilled. While occasional periods of hedonism might be required for some people’s satisfaction, I do not believe that a life filled purely with self-enjoyment can lead to true happiness. There is more to life than short-term pleasure, and thus the constant satisfaction of short-term desires does not directly contribute to long-term well-being, rather on the contrary; it necessarily takes time away that could be spent on projects, ideas, self-improvement, learning or forming and maintaining meaningful relationships for ongoing happiness with oneself and one’s life.  

## Time and Distraction

There has been slower productivity growth since 2007 compared to many decades before that. Most theories to explain this take an economic perspective such as revenues from digital companies that are not materialised yet, for example through digital business models that do not have a direct revenue stream but build on long-term future profits. However, it is worth noting that productivity in the society overall must suffer from an average mobile device screen time of around 4 hours per day, with over 3 additional hours of non-digital TV consumption on average per day (both measured in the US, [source](https://www.emarketer.com/)).  

I just cannot understand those numbers. Time is super precious. Every day I think about all the things I could do if I had more time - automatically, and as a practice to value every hour of the day and to spend it carefully. Every task needs to bring value. Invaluable tasks are a waste of time. That is neither to say that the day should consist only of work, nor that breaks are not allowed, nor that a day off or a week of vacation are wasted time. Not at all - breaks are super essential to well-being and can certainly be spent valuably. For example, I take a proper lunch break every day to divide my time spent focused into pre-lunchtime and post-lunchtime sessions. Most of those breaks I fill with a workout and making a nice lunch - both of which are great sources of value for me without being any work-related. I also spend at least half an hour at the end of the day to check and reply to messages and emails, which allows me to avoid the distracting browsing of social media throughout the day by opening only the inbox of the few social media platforms I use and checking in with people I care about. This is important to not find myself in the distraction loop explained [here](https://github.com/glitznerf/writing/blob/main/texting.md) but to be able to enter extended periods of focus.  

## Focus

Focus is a rare skill these days. Only very few people can stay focused for hours at a time. Most give up long before one hour has passed, just taking a “quick” glance at their phone, opening Facebook for a “quick” update, or even engaging in a “quick” digital conversation or taking a “quick” coffee break. "Quick" becomes minutes, and minutes becomes dozens of minutes when accounting for the time it takes to get back into the state of focus. Set yourself times, and work on your self-discipline. You can get more things done in 4 hours of full focus than in 8 hours of half-hearted working. Would it not be great to increase your efficiency and have more time for satisfying personal projects and leisure over taking unnecessarily long for necessary tasks? It may be long overdue to question the still widely spread typical workday of 8 hours of work with a lunch break in between, which does not generally match an individual’s optimal productivity pattern. Until then, though, it is probably a good idea to train yourself in sustained periods of focus not just for paid work, but also to keep a maintainable balance of duties and leisure by increasing overall productivity in the tasks you do.  

Note how I called focus a skill, not a natural ability. The state of focus is a skill you can train! Start small - have short sessions abandoning all distractions. No phone, no extraneous tabs, no internet at all if possible, and no getting up to make a coffee. Take breaks - a favourite of many highly productive people is the Pomodoro technique. The traditional version of this technique is to pick one task, set a 25-minute timer, work with maximum focus throughout this time, take a five-minute break, and repeat three times. Then take a longer break, and start over. Beware that you may not take advantage of distractions that will take your mind into completely different places during the short breaks - certainly no phones, internet, or even checking text messages. Even a short glance on what you missed - or did not miss - will take your mind off the focused state, making it very hard to put in maximum focus again from the beginning of the full 25 minutes that follow. Of course, you can adjust the times to your needs. Personally, 25 minutes are too short for most tasks I need to focus on, such as math problems. If I sit down to do mathematics, I start by reading something, developing thoughts, maybe attempting a problem, developing a deeper understanding of the topic, and then developing deeper thoughts on the problem at hand. A cycle like this is unlikely to be exactly 25 minutes. Popular “study with me”-Youtubers turn to a “1 hour work, 10-minute break” Pomodoro-style schedule. However, do not try to overdo it at first! Start small and build up to longer times. It is better to stay fully focused for a short time and to take regular breaks than to lose focus half an hour into a one-hour session.  

Obviously, not all of us can just work non-stop, work all hours that are not spent sleeping. Life would feel like a machinery, and even when you are the founder of some great company that is working on a product that positively affects the life of millions of people, where every hour you work is an hour well-spent, valuable to humanity and meaningful, even then you cannot work around the clock. But not working should not mean time wasted. Find something that feels good and valuable both in the moment and in the long term. Examples of non-working activities that are not wasted time are painting, carpentry, writing, reading, learning, sports. Bad examples are watching TV, unconscious eating, socialising at frequencies where it cannot reasonably be assumed to be for important conversation or connection building.  

Take the four hours of average mobile phone screen time. If you intuitively say that this is far away from your personal usage time, then look at your “digital wellbeing” screen that most smartphones have in their settings nowadays. Even if you only spend two - well done, you are very much below average! - imagine what you could do with just one additional hour per day, or 365 hours per year, if you only spent one on the phone. Write a book? Learn programming? Become super fit? All doable when allocating your wake time more consciously.  

## Final Thoughts

I am no apostle and not one to judge other people. All the above is the result of thoughts that I felt a need to put into words about how **I** want to live, spend **my** time and keep meaningful relationships. Additionally, I was inspired by other thinkers such as  Cal Newport, Jean Jacques Rousseau, and Lex Fridman. I do not want distractions to take over my life, and I have argued above what the steps are to prevent that from happening. To live valuable lives filled with satisfying days, we need to find effective strategies for ourselves to keep a balance between learning and creation, leisure and work.  

## Further Reading

[My thoughts on Texting](https://github.com/glitznerf/writing/blob/main/texting.md)  
[Digital Minimalism and Deep Work by Cal Newport](https://www.calnewport.com/)   
[Lex Fridman on productivity and discipline](https://www.youtube.com/user/lexfridman)   

## Note

This is still a **DRAFT** and not a fully edited manuscript. Please read out of curiosity and leisure, but do not quote or copy without request.
