# Modern Intelligence
## Intelligent?
One question that haunts me regularly because I just cannot settle on a clear answer is the nature of intelligence. Think about it for a moment - what *really* is intelligence? Is it being able to think logically? To connect the dots? To solve unseen problems? To know a lot of information? Scientists and Engineers try to build artificial intelligence, but in order to determine the success of their efforts, there is a need to formalise intelligence.  

In very general terms, I would describe intelligence as the ability to learn from experience, to adapt to and shape environments, and to solve concrete problems through abstraction and available information. For humans specifically, intelligence can be understood as a biological system involving multiple areas of the brain realising the above functionality, and practically as the ability to reason and make justified, well-informed decisions. In other words, high forms of intelligence could mean making well-argued decisions in uncertain situations with little direct knowledge, but drawing on complex and reasonable references from other situations and weighing their input together with the given applicable information.


## Theories of Intelligence
The question of intelligence is deeply connected to other questions regarding human nature, and has thus been explored as one of the earliest topics in Philosophy. The following are three more recent theories developed on top of neuropsychological and psychometric evidence that try to capture the ambiguity and diversity that we understand to be essential to the notion of intelligence as abstract frameworks.  

- *Gardner’s Theory of Multiple Intelligences* argues that intelligence is **not unitary**, so not a general intelligence, but rather that a fully intelligent being is composed of multiple different types of intelligence. These are namely the linguistic, mathematical, spatial, musical, bodily-kinesthetic, naturalist, interpersonal and intrapersonal intelligences. This notion captures the difference between some people’s exceptional abilities in some areas but their relatively lower performance in others.
- *Sternberg’s Triarchic Theory* gives another layer of abstraction to Gardner's Theory by dividing intelligence into three different skill sets. These capture the **creative**, **analytical**, and **practical** intelligences. Together, they make up the whole human intelligence lifecycle from the generation of novel ideas (creative) to assuring the ideas are actually good (analytical) and then implementing the ideas and persuading others to follow (practical). In an extended form, **wisdom** is added as a fourth intelligent skill set, summarizing the ability to ensure that the idea helps to achieve common good over the short and long term with positive ethical effects.
- The *Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) Theory* is the most comprehensive, newest, and most abstract theory about intelligence of the three. It divides intelligence into three strata that are hierarchically related to each other. Stratum 1 captures the **narrow** abilities such as working memory, Stratum 2 the **broad** abilities, specifically including g-c is the **crystallized** ability providing a general storage of knowledge relevant to adoption such as vocabulary, and g-f, the **fluid** ability to cope with novelty and to think rapidly and flexibly, and finally, Stratum 3 captures the **general** ability (g) that is theorized to be relevant to all tasks relying also on lower-Stratum intelligence.  

All of these theories are human-centred, meaning that they capture what humans think makes a human intelligent. However, even in abstract terms, these provide diverse frameworks for intelligence and indicate the difficulty of determining a system's or object's intelligence. Especially when adopting the CHC theory, it proves easy to determine one’s narrow abilities, achievable to test for broad abilities, but very difficult to test for general ability. Popular intelligence quotient (IQ) tests have adapted to new theories of intelligence over time, some of which now also target the fluid and crystallized abilities through decision speed, transfer knowledge, and vocabulary testing, but even now, many kinds of “intelligence tests” capture school achievement and knowledge and not real intelligent ability.  

## The Future of Intelligence
Intelligence comes down to efficient and effective problem-solving. Over the past decades, however, the types of problems most of us need to solve regularly have evolved. For many, they have shifted from manual to so-called intellectual tasks, that is from tasks that require predominantly musculoskeletal activity to tasks that require predominantly mental activity. This, and other influences, have transformed the kind and amount of intelligence needed.  

Take the ability to use technology. This is a fairly recent requirement to most of human life and involves complex interaction with machines, an understanding of what the machine is doing under the hood, and creativity and analytical skill to use them correctly for the desired output and to fix technical problems. However, this is not a one-sided drain of intelligence. Humans do not just need intelligence to use the technology. In reverse, technology possesses the ability to increase the user’s intelligence - or at least help greatly in efficient and effective problem-solving. On a side note, this brings up the question again of what makes a machine intelligent - is a machine that increases the user’s intelligence itself to be considered intelligent, or just a tool like any other?  

Given the human intelligence increase through technology, computers and connectedness have brought an intelligence revolution. Think about the divide-and-conquer approach to any kind of problem. Any problem at hand is likely to be divisible into subproblems. Divide the subproblems into subsubproblems, and continue until you arrive at what I will call primitive problems, that is non-divisible challenges. Once the problem is dissected like this, we can either apply past knowledge or inference, as primitive problems are likely to reoccur in different situations, or apply a first-principles approach - that is build a solution from the ground up without relying on many assumptions or experience - and then conquering the problem backwards. We end up with a solution to the problem at hand that is a well-formed composite of smaller answers to smaller questions.  

The above approach comes very naturally to us, although not always consciously applied. Think of the way you approach a printer that does not work. You think about what could be wrong - wiring? Internet connection? Empty ink cartridge? - and check these aspects systematically, by breaking down the potential problem even further. Or you are like my grandfather and call someone you expect to be better at solving this problem, like someone from a younger generation. Think about what this last option entails. Someone who has lots of life experience and is a trained engineer realises that using the intelligence of someone who has more specialized knowledge on the problem, modern technical intuition, and modern technical intellect for a moment will solve the problem with much greater effectiveness and efficiency. The thing with knowledge and specialism is that these days, it is incredibly hard to be a universal intellectual. Specialism has taken over the world, and knowledge is thus distributed across groups of people. It is simply not necessary anymore to have deep knowledge of everything when you have 20 people to go to for help, 150 more people to call or text, and a community of 4.66 billion more people online that might have written about their solutions to a similar problem.  

This situation of a connected community is interesting for the matter of intelligence, as one can now talk about a collective intelligence. Now, not just one person satisfies the requirements to do intelligent tasks, but a collective of people can be seen as an intelligent community or abstractly, as an intelligent distributed system. Intellectual tasks can be shared among people, with everyone taking up what they are best at, to achieve more and a better result together than any individual could. Add technology to the equation, and we could go from the industrial age’s division of labour to a modern age distributed superintelligence. Just imagine a direct interface between you and the 4.66 billion people as well as all of the internet's history. Then, human intelligence is not the average of all individuals considered individually but interconnectedly. From this perspective, cyborg technologies become appealing, for example brain-computer interfaces to have a direct link to online knowledge and an easy link to other people that each represent nodes in the distributed human intelligence network. Take knowledge, then there is no need to remember a lot of hard facts when you can rely on Wikipedia and other large information sources for that. Take solving of primitive problems, then you could query available experts in the field that are happy to help in millisecond time rather than you figuring it out over a long time. Take foreign languages… The idea is clear. Direct neural interfaces could yield the human superintelligence we have been awaiting.  

One could say that the above futurism is dystopic from the point of view that we will need less traditional education, not learn languages the same way and that we will rely on technology for everything. I argue that this would in no way lead to a less intellectual life from an individual's perspective, but rather a radical shift of intelligence usage. Fluid intelligence would be radically even more important than it already is now to adapt to change and new technologies and to understand them, as well as abstraction skills to understand the problems you have on a high level, break them into primitive problems, use analogies from similar problems instead of knowing the exact answer and using abstract frameworks to draw conclusions on concrete problems, and lastly creativity to come up with new technology and use cases to increase productivity, efficiency, and the good life.  

## Further Reading
[What Neuroscience says about intelligence](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3341646/)  
[Interesting read about the I in AI](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1610/1610.07862.pdf)  
*Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies - Nick Bostrom*  
[Neuralink's Brain-Computer Interface](https://neuralink.com/)  

## Note
This is still a **DRAFT** and not a fully edited manuscript. Please read out of curiosity and leisure, but do not quote or copy without request.
